[WIP] Chapter 5: Raster-Vector Interaction (#7)
geocompx/geocompjl: chapters/05-raster-vector.qmd

---
engine: julia
project:
  execute-dir: project
---

# Raster-vector interactions {#sec-raster-vector}

## Prerequisites {.unnumbered}

This chapter requires importing the following packages:

```{julia}
using GeoDataFrames, DataFrames
using Rasters, ArchGDAL # Raster I/O and operations
using Proj # activate reprojection capabilities
import GeoInterface as GI, GeometryOps as GO, LibGEOS as LG # Vector operations
import GeoFormatTypes as GFT # for CRS types
using GeoMakie, CairoMakie # plotting
```

> ```{julia}

Author: Yes, and we should probably set that in the intro chapter. 

The idea is that you'll plot most rasters as heatmap or surface, and those can get pretty big in SVGs.  Quarto was crashing when trying to load them - so it's easiest to define that all surfaces and heatmaps have to be rasterized as images before display.

Makie.set_theme!(
    Heatmap = (; rasterize = 2),
    Surface = (; rasterize = 2),
)
```

It also relies on the following data files:

```{julia}
src_srtm = Raster("data/srtm.tif")
src_nlcd = Raster("data/nlcd.tif")
src_grain = Raster("output/grain.tif")
src_elev = Raster("output/elev.tif")
src_dem = Raster("data/dem.tif")
zion = GeoDataFrames.read("data/zion.gpkg")
zion_points = GeoDataFrames.read("data/zion_points.gpkg")
cycle_hire_osm = GeoDataFrames.read("data/cycle_hire_osm.gpkg")
us_states = GeoDataFrames.read("data/us_states.gpkg")
nz = GeoDataFrames.read("data/nz.gpkg")
src_nz_elev = Raster("data/nz_elev.tif")
```

## Introduction

This chapter focuses on interactions between raster and vector geographic data models, both introduced in @sec-spatial-class.
It includes four main techniques:

-   Raster cropping and masking using vector objects (@sec-raster-cropping)
-   Extracting raster values using different types of vector data (Section @sec-raster-extraction)
-   Raster-vector conversion (@sec-rasterization and @sec-spatial-vectorization)

> These concepts are demonstrated using data from in previous chapters, to understand their potential real-world applications.

Author: ```suggestion
These concepts are demonstrated using data from previous chapters, to demonstrate their potential real-world applications.

## Raster masking and cropping {#sec-raster-cropping}

Many geographic data projects involve integrating data from many different sources, such as remote sensing images (rasters) and administrative boundaries (vectors).
Often the extent of input raster datasets is larger than the area of interest.
In this case, raster *masking*, *cropping*, or both, are useful for unifying the spatial extent of input data (@fig-raster-crop (b) and (c), and the following two examples, illustrate the difference between masking and cropping).

> Both operations reduce object memory use and associated computational resources for subsequent analysis steps, and may be a necessary preprocessing step before creating attractive maps involving raster data.

Author: ```suggestion
Both operations reduce memory use and computational demand for subsequent analysis,
```

We will use two layers to illustrate raster cropping:

-   The `srtm.tif` raster representing elevation, in meters above sea level, in south-western Utah: a **Rasters.jl** file connection named `src_srtm` (see @fig-raster-crop (a))
-   The `zion.gpkg` vector layer representing the Zion National Park boundaries (a `GeoDataFrame` named `zion`)

Both target and cropping objects must have the same projection.

> Since it is easier and more precise to reproject vector layers, compared to rasters, we use the following expression to reproject (@sec-reprojecting-vector-geometries) the vector layer `zion` into the CRS of the raster `src_srtm`.

Author: Huh, it looks like they define it a bit in chapter 1 and more rigorously in chapter 7:
https://r.geocompx.org/reproj-geo-data#crs-in-r

so it probably needs some explanation here.

```{julia}
zion = GO.reproject(zion; target_crs = GI.crs(src_srtm))
```

To mask the image, i.e., convert all pixels which do not intersect with the `zion` polygon to `missing`, we use the `Rasters.mask` function.  `mask` supports any geometry, vector of geometries, feature collection, or table with a geometry column!

```{julia}
out_image_mask = Rasters.mask(src_srtm; with = zion)
```

::: {.callout-note}
Note that since Julia has a native missing/NODATA value type, we don't need to specify a NODATA value for the `mask` function.

However, it can sometimes be useful and more efficient to specify a sentinel value which Rasters treats as missing.

You can do this by specifying the `missingval` keyword argument, like so:
```julia
out_image_mask = Rasters.mask(src_srtm; with = zion, missingval = 9999)
```
:::

> We can write this masked raster to file with `Rasters.write`, as usual:

Author: ```suggestion
We can write this masked raster to file with `Rasters.write`:
```

```{julia}
Rasters.write("output/srtm_masked.tif", out_image_mask; force = true
)
```

In **Rasters.jl**, cropping and masking are distinct operations.  Cropping, which reduces the raster extent to the extent of the vector layer, is accomplished with the `crop` function.

Here, we simply pass the `zion` feature table to the `to` keyword argument, which indicates what to crop the raster "to".  We also set the `touches` keyword argument to `true`, to specify that pixels that partially overlap with the vector layer are included in the output.

```{julia}
out_image_crop = Rasters.crop(src_srtm; to = zion, touches = true)
```

> You can also assemble an extent manually, using `Extents.Extent`, or extract one using `GI.extent`.

Author: Will do, this should go in a tabset of possible approaches.

We can crop our masked raster as well:

```{julia}
out_image_mask_crop = Rasters.crop(out_image_mask; to = zion, touches = true)
```

> and we write it to file as usual:

Author: ```
and we write it to file using `Rasters.write`:
```

The reverse of raster extraction---assigning raster cell values based on vector objects---is rasterization, described in @sec-rasterization.

**Rasters.jl** provides modular raster extraction and statistics functions, and we use this package in the following examples.

* To *points* (@sec-extraction-to-points) or to *lines* (@sec-extraction-to-lines), via the `Rasters.extract` function
* To *polygons* (@sec-extraction-to-polygons), via the `Rasters.zonal` function

### Extraction to points {#sec-extraction-to-points}

The simplest type of raster extraction is getting the values of raster cells at specific points.
To demonstrate extraction to points, we will use `zion_points`, which contains a sample of 30 locations within the Zion National Park (@fig-zion-points).

```{julia}
#| label: fig-zion-points
#| fig-cap: 30 point locations within the Zion National Park, with elevation in the background
fig, ax, plt = plot(src_srtm)
scatter!(ax, zion_points.geom, color=:black, strokecolor=:white, strokewidth = 1);
fig
```

The following expression extracts elevation values from `srtm.tif` according to `zion_points`, using `Rasters.extract`.

> ::: {.callout-danger}

Author: cc @rafaqz

> ::: {.callout-danger}

Reviewer: `extract` returns a tables.jl compatible table!

The API here is not great, can we do better?  It currently returns a vector of named tuples, which is not very convenient.

One thought is to use a Tables.jl materializer to convert the result if possible.  I understand the desire to return the geometry values.  But there must be a better way than this.
:::

```{julia}
result1 = Rasters.extract(src_srtm, zion_points; geometry = false) .|> first
```

The first argument is the raster from which to extract values, and the second is the vector object (or collection of objects) according to which to extract the values. 

::: {.callout-note}

> **Rasters.jl** does not yet support interpolation, so the values extracted are the values of the nearest cell center.  

Author: ```suggestion
**Rasters.jl** does not yet support interpolation in extraction, so the values extracted are the values of the nearest cell center.

> **Rasters.jl** does not yet support interpolation, so the values extracted are the values of the nearest cell center.  

Author: @rafaqz wasn't there a PR for linear interpolation?  Maybe `extract` could use that?  Or just define some interpolation strategy or something...

> **Rasters.jl** does not yet support interpolation, so the values extracted are the values of the nearest cell center.  

Reviewer: It needs some thought and review

However, this particular approach is not recommended to obtain values along the transects, as it is hard to get the correct distance between each pair of extracted raster values.

For line extraction, a better approach is to split the line into many points (at equal distances along the line) and then extract the values for these points using the "extraction to points" technique (@sec-extraction-to-points).
To demonstrate this, the code below creates (see @sec-vector-data for recap) `zion_transect`, a straight line going from northwest to southeast of the Zion National Park.

```{julia}
coords = [[-113.2, 37.45], [-112.9, 37.2]]
zion_transect = GI.LineString(coords)
```

The utility of extracting heights from a linear selector is illustrated by imagining that you are planning a hike.
The method demonstrated below provides an 'elevation profile' of the route (the line does not need to be straight), useful for estimating how long it will take due to long climbs.

First, we need to create a layer consisting of points along our line (`zion_transect`), at specified intervals (e.g., `250`).

> To do that, we need to transform the line into a projected CRS (so that we work with true distances, in $m$), such as UTM.

Author: ```suggestion
To do that, we need to transform the line into a projected CRS (so that we work with true distances, in $m$), such as [Universal Transverse Mercator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Transverse_Mercator_coordinate_system).

```{julia}
zion_transect_utm = GO.reproject(zion_transect; target_crs = GFT.EPSG(32612), source_crs = GFT.EPSG(4326))
```

The printout of the new geometry shows this is still a straight line between two points, only with coordinates in a projected CRS.

::: {.callout-danger}
I've chosen to differ from the Python treatment here - instead of selecting some number of points along the line explicitly, I will segmentize the line and extract the points.  This is less precise, but we don't have the API to do arclength interpolation in GeometryOps yet.  Hopefully this will be added soon.

cf. https://github.com/JuliaGeo/GeometryOps.jl/issues/210
:::

> Here, we interpolate points along the line using `GO.segmentize`.  

Author: ```suggestion
Here, we interpolate points along the line using `GO.segmentize`.  This operation is sometimes called line densification.
```

We first compute the length of the line, and then use this to segmentize the line into approximately 250 points.

```{julia}
_centroid, linelen = GO.centroid_and_length(zion_transect_utm)
zion_transect_line = GO.segmentize(zion_transect_utm; max_distance = linelen / 250)
```

> This gives us a collection of 251 points along the line.  We can extract the points by using `GI.getpoint` on the line, and then reproject the points to the CRS of the raster.

Author: ```suggestion
This gives us a collection of 251 points along the line.  We can extract the points that define the line segments by using `GI.getpoint` on the line, and then reproject the points to the CRS of the raster.

```{julia}
# Compute distances between successive points along the line
distances_between_points = GO.distance.(zion_transect_pnt.geometry[1:end-1], zion_transect_pnt.geometry[2:end])
# Compute cumulative distances along the line
cumulative_distances = cumsum([0.0; distances_between_points])
zion_transect_pnt[!, "dist"] = cumulative_distances
zion_transect_pnt
```

The information in `zion_transect_pnt`, namely the `"dist"` and `"elev"` attributes, can now be used to draw an elevation profile, as illustrated in @fig-zion-transect.

```{julia}
#| label: fig-zion-transect
#| fig-cap: Extracting a raster values profile to line 
#| layout-ncol: 2
#| fig-subcap: 
#| - Raster and a line transect
#| - Extracted elevation profile
# Raster and a line transect
fig, ax, plt = plot(src_srtm)
lines!(ax, zion_transect; color = :black)
poly!(ax, zion.geom; color = :transparent, strokecolor = :white, strokewidth = 0.75)
display(fig)
# Elevation profile
fig, ax, plt = lines(
    zion_transect_pnt.dist, 
    zion_transect_pnt.elev;
    axis = (;
        xlabel = "Distance (m)",
        ylabel = "Elevation (m)",
    )
)
fig
```

### Extraction to polygons {#sec-extraction-to-polygons}

> The final type of geographic vector object for raster extraction is polygons.

Author: ```suggestion
The final type of geographic vector object that can be used for raster extraction is polygons.

Like lines, polygons tend to return many raster values per vector geometry.
For continuous rasters (@fig-raster-extract-to-polygon (a)), we typically want to generate summary statistics for raster values per polygon, for example to characterize a single region or to compare many regions.

> The generation of raster summary statistics, by polygons, is demonstrated in the code below using `Rasters.zonal`, which creates a list of summary statistics (in this case a list of length 1, since there is just one polygon).

Author: ```suggestion
The generation of raster summary statistics, by polygons, is demonstrated in the code below using `Rasters.zonal`, which creates a list of summary statistics for "zones" defined by geometry.
In this case, a vector of length 1 is returned, since there is just one polygon in the `DataFrame`.
```

::: {.callout-danger}

> Rasters.zonal does not allow passing multiple functions. Would this provide a speedup?  Do we care?

Author: Will test - thanks for the hint!

> Rasters.zonal does not allow passing multiple functions. Would this provide a speedup?  Do we care?

Author: I think you can, but it will return a tuple and thus zonal will return a vector of tuples.

:::

```{julia}
using Statistics # for `mean`
rmean = Rasters.zonal(mean, src_srtm; of = zion)
rmin = Rasters.zonal(minimum, src_srtm; of = zion)
rmax = Rasters.zonal(maximum, src_srtm; of = zion)
result = (rmean, rmin, rmax)
```

> It's straightforward to transform the result to a DataFrame as well:

Author: ```suggestion
We then transform the result to a `DataFrame`, which makes it easier to track and handle geometry attributes
```

```{julia}
DataFrame(mean = rmean, min = rmin, max = rmax)
```

Because there is only one polygon in the example, single-element vectors are returned.
However, if `zion` was composed of more than one polygon, we would accordingly get more elements in the returned vectors.
The result provides useful summaries, for example that the maximum height in the park is `2661` $m$ above sea level.

> `Rasters.zonal` accepts any function that works on iterables and returns a single value, like `mean`, `minimum`, `maximum`, `std`, `median`, `mode`, `sum`, `prod`, etc.

Author: ```suggestion
`Rasters.zonal` accepts any function that works on iterables (collections of elements that can be looped over) and returns a single value, like `mean`, `minimum`, `maximum`, `std`, `median`, `mode`, `sum`, `prod`, etc.
::: {.callout-tip collapse="true"}
## You can pass your own custom function too!
```{julia}
function my_mean(iterable)
    result = 0.0
	for value in iterable
		result += value
	end
	result /= length(iterable)
	return result
end

Rasters.zonal(my_mean, src_srtm; of = zion)
```
:::

To count occurrences of categorical raster values within polygons (@fig-raster-extract-to-polygon (b)), we can use masking (@sec-raster-cropping) combined with `StatsBase.countmap`, as follows.

```{julia}

> out_image = Rasters.mask(src_nlcd; with = GO.reproject(zion; target_crs = GI.crs(src_nlcd)))

Author: Mostly to replicate Python exactly

Furthermore, the process of rasterization can help simplify datasets because the resulting values all have the same spatial resolution: rasterization can be seen as a special type of geographic data aggregation.

**Rasters.jl** provides the `Rasters.rasterize` function for rasterizing vector data.  To make this happen, we need to have some definition for a "template" grid, i.e., the "template" raster defining the extent, resolution and CRS of the output.  We can also pass a pre-existing raster, in which case Rasters uses the existing grid definition.

As for the vector geometries and their associated values, the `Rasters.rasterize` function can take input in multiple ways:
-    `; data::FeatureCollection, fill::Symbol` means that the values of the column passed to `fill` will be used to fill the raster.
-    `; data::Vector{Geometry}, fill::Vector` means that the values passed to `fill` will be associated with each geometry in `data` and used to fill the raster.
-    `; data::Any, fill::Function` calls `fill` with the current value

We will use the `; data::FeatureCollection, fill::Symbol` method to rasterize the `zion` polygon we have been using in this chapter.

> Furthermore, we define how to deal with multiple values burned into the same pixel, in the first argument called `reducer`.  By default, this is `last`, meaning that the last polygon to be rasterized takes precedence.  However, we can pass any function that takes in an iterable and returns a single value, like `mean`, `minimum`, `maximum`, `std`, `median`, `mode`, `sum`, `prod`, etc.  Many of these may not make sense to use but they are useful to know of.

Author: ```suggestion
Furthermore, we define how to handle multiple values burned into the same pixel, in the first argument called `reducer`.  
By default, this is `last`, meaning that the last polygon to be rasterized takes precedence.  
However, we can pass any function that takes in an iterable and returns a single value, like `mean`, `minimum`, `maximum`, `std`, `median`, `mode`, `sum`, `prod`, etc.  
Many of these may not make sense to use but they are useful to know of.

Finally, we can set the `fill` value, which is the value that "unaffected" pixels get, with `fill=0` being the default.

How the `Rasters.rasterize` function works with all of these various parameters will be made clear in the next examples.

> The geographic resolution of the "template" raster has a major impact on the results: if it is too low (cell size is too large), the result may miss the full geographic variability of the vector data; if it is too high, computational times may be excessive.

Reviewer 2: "The geographic resolution" to "the spatial resolution"?

Author: ```suggestion
The spatial resolution (area of each "pixel") of the "template" raster has a major impact on the results: if it is too low (cell size is too large), the result may miss the full geographic variability of the vector data; if it is too high, computational times may be excessive.

Spatial vectorization is the counterpart of rasterization (@sec-rasterization).
It involves converting spatially continuous raster data into spatially discrete vector data such as points, lines or polygons.
There are three standard methods to convert a raster to a vector layer, which we cover next:

-   Raster to polygons (@sec-raster-to-polygons)---converting raster cells to rectangular polygons, representing pixel areas
-   Raster to points (@sec-raster-to-points)---converting raster cells to points, representing pixel centroids
-   Raster to contours (@sec-raster-to-contours)

Let us demonstrate all three in the given order.

### Raster to polygons {#sec-raster-to-polygons}

Rasters.jl does not currently have a function to convert a raster to a feature collection with one polygon per pixel or cell.  This is a similar situation in Python with `rasterio`.

GeometryOps.jl offers a `polygonize` function that returns a feature collection of polygons, where each feature has a `value` property that encodes the value of all pixels within that polygon.  Each polygon contains pixels with the same value.

```{julia}
fc = GO.polygonize(src_grain)
```

> To load this as a `DataFrame`, we can take a shortcut and read it as GeoJSON (which is convertable to a DataFrame).  

Reviewer 2: This is a bit confusing as I typically think of GeoJSON as a file format ... I realize not that it's just a JSON string .. not sure how to make describe this better

Author: I should drop that and just have this do the DataFrame convert - all of this will get ironed out by https://github.com/JuliaGeo/GeoInterface.jl/pull/156 anyway!

GeoDataFrames.read("output/elev.gpkg")
```

@fig-raster-to-points shows the input raster and the resulting point layer.

```{julia}
#| label: fig-raster-to-points
#| fig-cap: Raster and point representation of `elev.tif`
#| layout-ncol: 2
#| fig-subcap: 
#| - Input raster
#| - Points
# Input raster
fig, ax, plt = plot(src_elev)
scatter!(ax, df.XY; color = df.layer1)
display(fig)
# Points
fig, ax, plt = plot(src_elev; alpha = 0.1)
scatter!(ax, df.XY; color = df.layer1, strokecolor = :black, strokewidth = 1)
fig
```

TODO: nodata pixels

### Raster to contours {#sec-raster-to-contours}

Another common type of spatial vectorization is the creation of contour lines, representing lines of continuous height or temperatures (*isotherms*), for example.
We will use a real-world digital elevation model (DEM) because the artificial raster `elev.tif` produces parallel lines (task for the reader: verify this and explain why this happens).
*Plotting* contour lines is straightforward, using the `contour` or `contourf` functions in **Makie**.

```{julia}
f, ax, plt = contour(src_dem; levels = LinRange(0, 1200, 50), color = :black)
```

TODO: gdal_contour (via ArchGDAL??)

> It would be good to show how to use the provided GDAL executables though...

Reviewer 2: I agree... I wonder if a section on file minipulation using GDAL should be added at some point. This could include building a vrt of raster files, merging shapefiles, cropping shapefiles, converting between file formats

Author: I agree!  There's a chapter in the R book https://r.geocompx.org/gis that would be perfect for that, maybe we even make this a separate chapter.

Reviewer 3: Another option is to include such examples in i/o chapter (building a vrt, merging files, converting between formats) and raster-vector chapter (cropping).

(Side comment: I would suggest not using shapefiles (the file format) at all, except maybe mentioning it; it is time to stop using this format imo)

Reviewer 2: Shapefile is a horrible format that users need to know how to work with as there is so much legacy data out there... maybe the only example we show is how to convert a shapefile to something useful ;-)

Reviewer 3: That would be also my suggestion -- guiding readers in right direction (i.e. opposite of the shapefile one:))
